>>[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>"Eastern Wisdom and Modern
Life" with Alan W. Watts.
Produced by KQED San Francisco
for the Educational Television
and Radio Center.
Alan Watts is a
scholar, lecturer,
and the author of
many widely read books
on comparative
philosophy and religion.
>>This is not the figure
of a strange pagan god.
It is the figure of a man,
an awakened man-- of Buddha.
And I expect you
may have wondered
why almost all figures of
Buddha or of many other Eastern
sages that you see
are seated like this.
This figure of Buddha is in
the posture of meditation.
And the way in
which he is seated
and the whole cast of his
features and of his expression
symbolize a certain
attitude to life,
a certain way of
looking at things
which in Indian and
Chinese philosophy
is considered
essential to sanity.
Perhaps I can give you some idea
of the meaning of this attitude
by demonstrating it with a
Chinese character, a word which
represents this whole
attitude to life.
Most of you probably know
that Chinese characters
are originally picture writing.
And in this
particular character,
this half of the character
is said, originally,
to have represented some
water bird, perhaps a stork
or a heron.
And this other part
of the character
is, first of all, a sign
meaning the human eye.
And then you put legs on
it-- the activity of the eye.
And that means seeing.
And the whole character
is pronounced kuan.
And it means a certain kind
of observation, a certain way
of looking at things
which might be typified
by the image of a heron standing
at the edge of the water
as in this painting which is by
the great Japanese artist Kano
Motonobu.
There is the heron standing
quietly and serenely,
watching the water.
And so the whole meaning
of this attitude to life
is what is summed up
in the entire Eastern
idea of meditation typified
in these Buddha figures.
And I want to try today to
explain to you something
of the meaning of
this attitude to life.
For fundamentally, meditation
is not so much an exercise
as it is a certain way of
using one's mind or one's
consciousness because normally
most human beings, when
they use their eyes or
their ears, are constantly
and chronically straining
to see and to hear.
And when you come
to think of it,
that's very odd because our
eyes don't work by effort.
They don't have to go
out and get the light.
The light comes to them.
And in the same way,
sound becomes to our ears.
And even the sense of touch
comes to our fingertips.
We don't, for example,
have to press a thing hard.
If I went in the dark and
tried to fumble and feel
what this is, I don't have
to press very hard to feel it
because the sensation,
simply, of the hard object
comes to the nerve
ends in my skin.
And so it's strange,
isn't it, that we
have acquired the habit of a
constant and chronic effort
to see clearly and
to hear clearly.
I think part of it
comes from school.
When children are listening
to a teacher in class,
they are always fidgeting
or doing something like this
and looking around and
twisting and jiggling.
And the teachers
says, pay attention!
And the children immediately,
to ingratiate the teacher,
are able to sort of ham or act
what paying attention is like.
And paying attention,
of course, is
staring at the
teacher like that.
Yes, I'm very interested
in what you say.
And sometimes, to get
that concentration clear,
they curl up their legs
around the legs of a chair
and go into all these
strained attitudes
so that the teacher
knows they really
are trying very hard to attend.
And it is through such
conditioning like that,
through being
taught that we must
try to see and try
to hear in order
to have clear sight
and clear hearing
that we learn constantly to
strain our senses in their use.
But as a matter of
fact, this impedes
the clarity of our
senses because if you
will try staring hard at
the book in front of you
or staring very hard
at the TV screen
you're looking at
right now, you will
find that it becomes fuzzy.
Also, in the same way, if you
are trying to listen, say,
to a telephone conversation
while the children are running
all over the house
and screaming,
if you try to listen
to the telephone,
you'll get very
angry, and you will
have to stop to yell at the
children to make them be quiet.
On the other hand,
if you just let
the sound come to
your ears, you'll
have no difficulty
at all in hearing.
So you remember then
that heron I showed you.
When that heron was
watching the fish,
it wasn't sort of
going like this.
It's all over the place.
We want to fish
here, fish here-- no.
Heron is this-- quiet like this.
And as it were, the
whole area of vision
is simply coming to
the heron's eyes.
And the moment it sees
a ripple in the water,
it darts down and gets the fish.
Now, I don't think it's only
that we have been taught
by teachers and
parents and so on
to try to see and
try to hear clearly.
There are other
factors in the problem.
And one of them is that while
we are seeing and hearing,
we are trying to make sense of
our world by thinking about it.
And the act of thinking also
introduces an element of strain
into the use of our minds.
And I think the reason
for this is perhaps
you will remember how I showed
you on a previous program
that thought is linear.
You know, it goes one
word after another.
It's strung out in a line.
We think-- thought, thought,
thought, thought, thought,
thought-- in a line like
this, one after another.
Whereas, when we see, we see
to what is going on entirely.
We take in a volume when we see.
We take in a great area.
Nature is a volume rather than
something strung out in a line.
But when we think, we get
one thought after another.
And so the process of
thought is much slower
than the process of seeing
and using our consciousness
or our mind as a whole.
And this then requires
a certain effort
to make thought keep up
with what we are seeing
or what we are hearing.
Also, you see, thought
works by abstraction.
What do I mean by "abstraction"?
Well, a lot of Chinese
characters are abstractions.
If we take, for example, the
Chinese character for man.
It is written this way.
Now, that was originally
the head and legs
of a human figure.
Something you know,
like this, when
we draw an abstract
figure of a man,
everybody knows that's a man.
But as a matter of fact, it
cuts out a great deal of man.
This figure cuts
out all the details
and gives us a simple image
which we can grasp all at once.
And we have to do that
in order to think,
so that we can use a series
of very simple images
or grasps of the world.
And these are abstractions.
And it is fundamentally in terms
of abstractions that we think.
Now, thought, as
I said, is slower
because it goes in a line,
thought after thought.
And also, thought is abstract.
That is to say, it
lacks the full living
quality of real life just
as this figure here is just
a sort of skeleton,
ball on top of sticks.
And therefore, it
lacks the vitality,
the "aliveness" of a real man.
Now, the more we tend to
live in a world of thought,
the more we tend to live
in an abstract world that
is removed from and
has a gap between it
and the real world of nature.
And as a result of
this, we tend to live
in a world that
is, in some ways,
unsatisfying, lacking
in vitality and life.
And also, people tend
to think all the time.
This becomes for every
civilized community,
every civilized person
a sort of habit,
which is like constantly
talking to yourself.
Now, of course, when you meet
me here on the TV screen,
I'm always talking,
or almost always.
But I assure you, I
am not always talking.
I'm often silent
because, after all, we
have to be silent
some of the time,
don't we, in order to hear
what other people have
to say, and therefore, to
have something to talk about.
In just the same
way, our minds have
to be silent some of the time if
we are really to have anything
to think about except thoughts.
You know, there is
a popular proverb
which says that
"talking to yourself
is the first sign of madness."
And there's some truth in this
because constant thinking,
as distinct from
simply experiencing
through our senses, constant
thinking about our experiences,
coding our experiences
into words, into signs,
into the symbols of thought
is a buzz that goes on day in
and day out inside our heads
except when we are sleeping.
And as a result
of that, we begin
to live in a world increasingly
divorced from reality.
And that is why in those
oriental cultures in India
and China and
Japan, it has always
been considered important
for everybody to spend some
of his time-- by no means all
of his time, but some of it--
not thinking but simply in the
attitude which was represented
by that Chinese
character which I drew
at the beginning, pronounced
"kuan" or quiet observation.
Remember this point,
it's important.
This is not saying that thinking
is a disturbance, is a thing
that human beings shouldn't do.
On the contrary, it's a highly
important acquisition of man.
But thinking is of
no real value to us
unless we also can
practice nonthinking,
unless we can have
our minds silent
and make immediate contact
with the real world as distinct
from the world of
pure abstraction.
And so this leads to a very
common practice in Asia
among Hindus, among Buddhists,
among Taoists called
meditation.
And I want to try and show
you something about it.
By sitting in the
posture of meditation
which is commonly used and is
done approximately like this.
One sits upon a firm cushion.
Usually, a big city
telephone directory
is about the right thickness.
And ordinarily, among
Oriental peoples,
they sit in what is called Lotus
Posture or Half-Lotus Posture
as I'm sitting now, which means
that the right foot is lifted
up onto the left thigh.
You will find, of
course, that that's
an extraordinarily
uncomfortable position
if you're not used to it.
But one of the reasons
for sitting that way
is that it locks
your legs together,
so that you don't usually fall
over if you should go to sleep.
And also, that this
position gives you
a sense of being very, very
firmly rooted to the ground.
And then the hands
are laid like this.
And one then turns attention
to letting oneself breathe.
You don't do breathing exercises
taking deep inhalations
and exhalations.
You simply let your breath
come as it wants to.
But you, if anything,
let the out-breath--
you know, the breath that goes
with the sigh of relief-- whew.
You let that be the emphasized
breath rather than the
in breath.
You don't close your eyes.
You usually drop them a little
on the floor in front of you
because the object is not
to cut out all the things
that you might be
experiencing through your eyes
and through your ears,
through your nose
and your nerve ends on the skin.
The object is simply to
let one's mind alone,
to experience but not
to try to catch hold
of one's experience in
thoughts-- simply, to think.
No, I wouldn't say "think."
That's a word we use
very ambiguously.
When I use the word "think,"
I mean talk to yourself
or bring a lot of images before
your mind, which have nothing
to do with what's
right in front of you.
So the function of this
exercise, this posture
is to let the whole world come
to you without interfering
with it in any way--
just sitting like that.
You may say, well, that's
a great waste of time.
There are all sorts of
interesting things in life
to do.
Why just spend
some hours sitting?
And the reason, though,
as I tried to explain,
is that it is
through this that one
comes to have a contact
no longer with the world
of abstractions, no longer
with the world of thought
but with the world
that actually is.
Now, as you do
this, you'll begin
to notice a rather
curious change
in your general feeling of life.
You'll notice that
there ceases to be
what I would call an
interruption or an interval
between your experience
and yourself.
You see, in our ordinary
way of using our minds,
the chronic sense of
strain, the chronic attempt
to think about and make
sense of what we are feeling
is what we call our ego.
If you say, "I experienced
my own existence.
I am aware constantly
of a knower behind I'm
receiving all that
is known," then you
get this chronic sensation
of there being an I,
a self who has all
these experiences.
And that I or self is
what we call the ego.
And this chronic
sense of strain, you
might call it our
psychological blocking
against our experience.
The thing that seems to divide
us from an external world,
from the whole universe.
But when, in this way, the
interval begins to diminish,
we begin to
experience our world.
As ourselves, there
is no interval,
there is no interruption between
the knower and the known.
Just as when we are completely
absorbed listening to music
or dancing to music, we are
not aware of our separation
from it.
We go right with it.
And so in the same way, when
the mind responds instantly
to what the senses
bring, it seems almost as
if the mind and
what it experiences
were one and the same.
Now, in a way, of course,
this is actually true.
We can understand
this theoretically,
but we don't ordinarily
really feel it.
For example, you
know the old saying,
"If a tree falls in a forest
with nobody listening to it,
will there be any noise?"
Perhaps you know the limericks
in which this problem is posed.
"There was a young man who said,
God, I find it exceedingly odd
that a tree as a
tree simply ceases
to be when there's no
one around in the quad."
And the answer was, "Young
man, your astonishment's odd.
I am always around in the quad.
So the tree as a
tree never ceases
to be since observed by,
yours faithfully, God."
But this is a great
philosophical puzzle
for the Western world.
Does what we know depend
on there being a knower?
Now, in a way,
obviously, it does
because when a tree
falls in the forest,
it certainly makes
vibrations in the air.
But those vibrations
in the air do not
become noise unless
they vibrate an eardrum.
So in the same way,
the light from the sun
does not become light unless
it falls on an eye, an eyeball.
And two, we could say
the external world
is full of hard things.
But nothing is hard
except in relation
to the soft surface
of the human skin.
Nothing is heavy except in
relation to human muscles.
So if there is not
a human organism,
the world does not
appear to us at all
as having any of
the characteristics
which we attach to
an external world.
In other words, we could
say the sun is light
but only because of eyes.
Rocks are hard but only
because of soft fingers.
Falling rocks are
noisy but only because
of sensitive human ears.
We cannot form any idea at all
of what the world would be like
without an observing mind.
Even such things as
duration, the span of time
depend upon the human
mind to appreciate them.
Space depends on a human
mind to observe the world
from a particular
position, and so
know that there are things
which are distant from it.
Without this mind,
there could not
be any world that we could think
about or conceive or imagine
in any way whatsoever.
And so this shows,
in a very clear way,
that our mind and the
external world go together.
They are inseparable
differences.
You remember in a recent program
how I tried to illustrate
the idea of inseparable
differences by taking a coin
or an object here, like a cigar,
which has two distinct ends,
but you cannot
separate those ends.
This is very important.
It's worth repeating because
it's quite fundamental.
If I would want to
take one of these ends
off and break the thing
and throw it away,
it would still have another end.
There would still
be two ends there.
I could never get
rid of the situation
of it having two ends.
So you see that, although
the two ends are different,
there is just one object.
And so in the same
way, although there
is a difference in a way between
the knower and the known,
between man and the world,
nevertheless, these two
go together.
And they are
fundamentally inseparable.
And therefore, when
our consciousness
is responding instantly, without
any interval or interruption,
without any, shall we say,
stopping to think about it,
then we have a situation
in which we are actually
realizing, we are
actually feeling
the true physical
relationship which
exists between man
and his environment.
And this we could call the
experience of oneness or unity
with the universe which is
the function of meditation.
Now, I think it's not difficult
to see some very obvious values
from this because, well,
if we live entirely
in a world of thought, all the
things that we pursue in life
tend, in a way, to become
arid and unsatisfactory
because we are living
in an abstract world.
In other words,
nobody in his senses
is going to eat a menu
instead of dinner.
Nobody in his senses
is going to try and get
a satisfactory diet
of dollar bills.
And yet, you see,
dollar bills and menus
stand in the same
relation, on the one hand,
to wealth; on the
other hand, to dinner.
The same relation in which
thought stands to reality.
They represent it.
They symbolize
reality, but they are
in no sense
substitutions for it.
Yes, you can do a
great deal of things
if you have a lot
of dollar bills.
But unless you exchange
those dollar bills
into real concrete worth,
they are of no value to you.
And so in the same
way, if we try
to live in the world
of pure thought,
we begin to feel a strange,
unsatisfactory quality
to the world.
And this living in
pure thought is not
something that is only done by
professors and intellectuals
and thinking people.
Perfectly ordinary
people often live
in the world of pure thought.
As for example, when
we pursue certain goals
in life, when we say "I
want to be successful,"
"I want to be happy,"
these are only
abstractions because supposing
you become enormously wealthy
and you're able to afford
three cars and six houses,
you can't drive in
three cars at once.
You can't live in
six houses at once.
You have a symbol which we
call prestige of your status.
But that is an abstract symbol.
You can't eat prestige.
You can't eat success.
And so to overcome that
kind of beguilement
by the fantasies of
thought, not thinking
is an important
adjunct to thought.
To be able every so often
to cease the hubbub going
on inside one's head and to
let talking to oneself stop
and come to stillness,
you needn't, of course,
sit in a meditation
posture like this to do it.
This is simply the way it's
done by Buddhists and Hindus.
You can walk.
You can sit in the ordinary way.
You could lie in the
bathtub and do it.
You can lie in your back
in bed before you get up
in the morning to do it.
Just let your mind
alone and stop
trying to make
sense of the world,
so that there is
really something
to think about other
than thought itself.
It's like if we wrote books
about nothing but books.
This is, I'm afraid, what
a great deal of scholarship
is-- books about
books about books.
So in this way,
through meditation
we come to that kind
of profound peace
which is exhibited in the
faces of the Buddhists.
I remember
particularly some words
by Lafcadio Hearn in which he
gives a marvelous description
of the whole attitude which
these faces represent.
"Each eidolon shaped
by human faith
remains the shell of a
truth eternally divine;
and even the shell itself
may hold a ghostly power.
The soft serenity, the
passionless tenderness
of these Buddha faces might
yet give peace of soul
to a West weary of creeds
transformed into conventions,
eager for the coming of
another teacher to proclaim,
I have the same feeling for
the high as for the low,
for the moral as
for the immoral,
for the depraved as
for the virtuous,
for those holding sectarian
views and false opinions
as for those whose beliefs
are good and true."
>>[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>This is National
Educational Television.